Good day i'm Norman Wildberger and today we're
to talk more about circles in fact we're going
to discuss parameterizing the points that lie on
circles now our approach to geometries to work
entirely within the rational number framework
this is the simplest and most natural arena in
which to do geometry later on when we get a little
bit more sophisticated arithmetic Allah will talk
about extension fields and introduce irrational
numbers as well but it's important to realize that
the essential features are already here when
we just looking at the rational number field
in fact many interesting relationships between
geometry and arithmetic are obscured if we go
too quickly to higher fields for example the so
called real numbers number theory and geometry
are naturally linked as we're going to see today
when we talk about points on circles a circle for
us is an equation like this X minus a squared
plus y minus B squared equals K the point a B
is called the center of the circle the number K
which can be completely arbitrary it's called the
quadrants of the circle we usually denote a circle
with a little curly see here is the equation of
the circle written out and we can express that by
concretely listing the coefficients of x squared
XY Y squared X Y and the constant term in a list
this proportion of six coefficients effectively
captures what a circle is and in fact that's
how we defined officially what a circle was the
question we want to talk about today is when does
a point XY lie on such a circle and which points
lie on in the such a circle it's made simpler by a
observation that if x and y satisfy this equation
then x minus a and y minus b satisfy this somewhat
simpler equation x squared plus y squared equals K
and since going from X Y to X minus a y minus B is
simply a shift we can without loss of generality
restrict ourselves to simpler circles of this
kind circles whose center is at the origin so
let's have a look at the simplest possible circle
the unit circle with equation x squared plus y
squared equals 1 there it is there with Center 0
0 and it goes through the point 1 0 0 1 minus 1 0
and 0 minus 1 but it actually goes through a lot
of other points as well how do we get those other
points well you may remember that 3 4 5 triangle
is a right triangle so 3 this way for this way 5
hypotenuse that's a right triangle that's telling
us that 3 squared plus 4 squared equals 5 squared
and if you divide by 5 squared you get that 3 over
5 all squared plus 4 over 5 all squared equals 1
so the point 3/5 4/5 is also a point on the unit
circle and it comes from Pythagorean triple and
that's a general kind of phenomena which is
captured by this theorem every point on this
circle with the exception of minus 1 0 can be
written in this following form 1 minus t squared
over 1 plus T squared 2t over 1 plus T squared
when T is 0 we're here when T is 1 we are here
when T is minus 1 we are here and as T gets bigger
and bigger we approach this point when T becomes
a bigger and bigger negative number we approach
this point from the opposite direction naturally
connected with this parameterization is this
identity or this relation that if you take 1 minus
T squared and square it and take 2t and square it
and you add them then you get exactly 1 t squared
all squared this rational parameterization of
a circle of the unit circle is very useful and
important and for many applications involving
circle geometry it's preferable to the more
usual familiar parameterization involving the
transcendental circular functions cosine and sine
the problem with this parameterization is that
it's almost never accurate if you actually want an
example of a number of a point like this you plug
into your calculator it spews out some answers to
10 decimal places or whatever and you get the
point which is approximately on the circle but
not exactly on the circle this parameterization
we're still dealing in hundred percent accuracy
which is what we want because we want to do
mathematics completely correctly now let's see
how this result this parameterization of the unit
circle extends to a more general circle now let's
have a look at the general circle with equation x
squared plus y squared equals K we'll assume that
there's at least one point on the circle say a
B so that a squared plus B squared equals K then
there's at least these other points minus a minus
B minus B a and B minus a which are also on that
circle how do we parameterize the points on this
circle well it's a little bit different a little
bit more complicated but it's the same generalized
idea as for the unit circle every point on this
circle with the exception of this minus a minus B
can be written uniquely in this form x-coordinate
a times 1 minus t squared minus b times 2t all
over one plus t-squared and y-coordinate a times
2t plus b times 1 minus t squared all over 1 plus
t squared so that's a theorem that follows in a
similar way as does the the previous one and gives
a complete parameterization of a general circle
one of the interesting feature about geometry
with circles is that a line through the origin
or the center does not necessarily have to meet
the circle whether it does so or not depends on
number theoretical considerations and so we
get a link between the geometry very simple
geometry and classical problems in number theory
that have been around for thousands of years now
we're studied by Euclid that were studied by
Fermont and his contemporaries so the situation
in general here with the circle of the form
X square plus y squared equals K and a line
through the origin of the form ax plus B y equals
0 is that the line meets the circle precisely
when this number theoretic condition is satisfied
when a squared plus B squared times K is a square
when we say it's a squared we mean that it's a
number a rational number R squared and so this
line L may or may not meet a circle through
the center there so this is a little bit of
a different aspect of circles than you're used to
when you deal with real numbers with real numbers
a lot of arithmetic Allah subtlety vanishes from
geometry so one of our aims is to bring back this
natural number theoretical aspect of geometry
into elementary geometry also in our next video
we're going to have a look at another important
concept from elementary geometry the idea of a
vector I hope you're gonna join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger and thanks for listening you
you